---
author: huetri@gmail.com
title: Tri Ton
slug: triton
id: 5
date: '2011-08-13 03:36:25'
layout: page
comments: false
---

Welcome to my notebook - a place contains my personal stories and thoughts across journeys.  The notebook is divided into two sections: <span style="color: #008080;">(1) Writing</span> - contains my thinking and <span style="color: #008080;">(2) Picture</span> - showed in "Explore:" prefix - contains stories of my life, people, and travels.  The Writing section is divided into 3 main categories:

*   [<span style="color: #008080;">Global Macro</span> ](https://huetri.com/category/global-macro/)- Macroeconomic major events, politics, history, and current flows.
*   [<span style="color: #008080;">Investment</span>](https://huetri.com/category/investment/) - Conceptual philosophies, policies, analysis, and strategy.
*   [<span style="color: #008080;">Nomad Thinking</span>](https://huetri.com/category/nomad-thinking/) **-** General personal thinking and feeling about life, business, and the world

The Picture section is further classified into 4 sub-categories: [<span style="color: #008080;">(1) Life</span>](https://huetri.com/life/), [<span style="color: #008080;">(2) Nature</span>](https://huetri.com/explore-nature/), [<span style="color: #008080;">(3) People and Culture</span>](https://huetri.com/explore-people-cultures/), and [<span style="color: #008080;">(4) My Exploration</span>](https://huetri.com/explore-my-exploration/).

My personal philosophy centralizes around freedom and finding the truth.  I believe in meritocracy, free will, and uncertainty.  This website serves as a reflection of my thinking throughout my journeys rather than a structural document of what I know.  I hope through my stories, I can share another perspective of life and make the world a better place.

I'm a venturer.  I believe business is a medium to express thinking, to fight for a cause, and to push humanity forward.  I spend most of my time on Altair Alpha, a venture in used books and paper recycling industry.  Concurrently, I also serve as a Board Member of Cloudjet Solutions (“CJS”), a venture backed cloud based firm that provides management applications in Human Resources to small and medium businesses in Vietnam.  Throughout my career, I have worked on over 100 deals and ventures across 19 industries (total estimate accumulated deal size around USD 650M), raised capital several times, and facilitated a strategic trade-sale exit.  I started my career as a private equity professional at Vietnam Investments Group ("VI Group"), a premier private equity firm in Vietnam specializing on expansion capital with USD 500M asset under management across 3 funds.  My private equity experience included strategy, valuation, and negotiations for prospect and portfolio investees as well as serving as Deputy CEO and Board Member of the largest VI Group's pharmaceutical/agricultural deal with 9 M&As.  Prior to VI Group, I was an Executive Board Member of AIESEC Ho Chi Minh Local Committee, serving as Vice President of External Relations.  I am an AmCham Vietnam's Scholar and has a Bachelor of Business Administration in Accounting and Finance from International University - Vietnam National University.

 - ∞ -

_"(Tri) You are not willing to just accept life for what it is, but want to make it what you want."_ - 2009, Dr. Charles Leonard Wilson - Professor, International University, VNU -

 - ∞ -