---
author: huetri@gmail.com
title: >-
  An Analysis on Relations of Price-Earnings Ratio and Market Capitalization to
  Anomaly Returns [6]
slug: >-
  an-analysis-on-relations-of-price-earnings-ratio-and-market-capitalization-to-anomaly-returns-6
id: 668
date: '2010-05-30 19:35:42'
layout: post
comments: false
categories:
  - Investment
  - 'Market: Vietnam'
tags:
  - Academic
  - Vietnam Investment
---

**CHAPTER V**

**CONCLUSION**

_Long-Term Capital Management was probably one of the most typical convergences between academic world and wealth management industry. The fund based its strategy on an Option Pricing model of Myron Scholes and Robert C. Merton, who shared the 1997 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences, and effectively failed the year after, 1998, following the Russian financial crisis._

Let’s go more detail into the story. Long-Term Capital Management (hereafter: LTCM), a U.S. hedge fund, was founded in 1994 by John William Meriwether, who graduated from University of Chicago Booth School of Business and is recognized as a pioneer of fixed income arbitrage. Long-Term Capital Management recognized the major contributions of 1997 Nobel Prize laureates Myron Scholes, Stanford University professor, and Robert C. Merton, Harvard University professor, in its strategies in fixed income arbitrage, statistical arbitrage, and pairs trading combined with high leverage. LTCM started with US$ 1.01 billion in capital by February 24th, 1994 and recognized enormously successful in its first years with over 40% profit after fee. By the time of 1998, the fund exposed to a total debt (On and Off-balance sheet) of total more than US$ 1.25 trillion and lost US$ 4.6 billion in less than four months following the Russia Financial Crisis. Even LTCM got a massive bailout by other major banks and investment entities which supervised by the Fed, LTCM still effectively collapsed and closed in early 2000\. The story is still ahead.

One year later, John William Meriwether, established his 2nd fund with initial equity of US$ 250 million named JWM Partners and claimed to follow the previous strategies of the two Nobel Prize winners used once by Long-Term Capital Management with a more rigorous risk management. Eventually, this fund badly hurt by the mortgage crisis of 2007-2008 and also effectively failed in 2009\. The story also did not end here.

John William Meriwether is opening his 3rd hedge fund named JM Advisors Management in 2010\. Once again, the fund is expected to use similar strategies of both LTCM and JWM Partners, which is backed up by the model of Nobel Prize winners Scholes and Merton. Probably, it is too soon to give any prediction about his venture, but one funny joke on the internet about LTCM and John William Meriwether was: “Be extremely careful to Nobel Prize winning models!!!”

The story above probably misleads audience that the failure of LTCM and JWM Partners was mainly due to the strategies suggested by Merton and Scholes. The truth is that the investment failures of John William Meriwether are mainly due to extremely high leverage exposure (with approximately 250-to-1 in LTCM, with a total debt of off-balance sheet over US$ 1 trillion in 1998) under unfavorable macro conditions. For the model, actually, the Black-Scholes Model is a very robust model and used widely in pricing European-Stype Options as well as other derivative instruments. Nowadays, the convergence of academic world and investment community has evolved to a hyper-correlated relationship that any changes or actions from each side do strongly affect to the other side.

Finance is an old industry. So old that the innovations in financial world made all of other fields feel jealous about its advances in the most recent 100 years. In that, the effective supports from academic world to finance played a central role and this trend will surely be continued. As the thesis has presented from above sections, many current investment strategies and styles were first established and tested under academic theories and empirical studies. Those studies about effects like IPO, Negected Firms and Trading Activity, or Calendar are well established and applied under developed stock markets like NASDAQ or S&P 500; while the applicable characteristic of them to other emerging markets like Vietnamese stock markets is still a question that needs to be answered.

With that wondering, this thesis tried to examine the behaviors of VNIndex, as known as HoSE, by examining its behaviors under a total of 161 chosen companies through 2 parameters of Size and P/E. The purpose is to examine the Size Effect, P/E Effect, and the combination effect of both Size and P/E to seek alphas during the study period of 2007-2010\. Finally, there was finally some meaningful evidence that stand against the Efficient Market Hypothesis under VNIndex context.

P/E Effect is proven to exist. However, not like findings of Nicholson (1960) and Basu (1977) about low P/E companies tend to outperform, the findings of P/E Effect in this particular thesis point out moderate P/E (Mod P/E) tends to outperform both the lowest and highest P/E of the entire tickers. No significant change found with transaction costs taken into consideration. These findings directly support the arguments of Johnson, Fiore, and Zuber (1989) who stated that there were some abnormal returns by using P/E, but those excess returns were not belonged to low P/E stocks.

Size Effect is proven to exist. Returns of risk-adjusted from smallest firms are shown to be most noticeable with a daily return alpha of 0.094%. Supported by a relatively strong p-value of 3%, the results explain the reason why many investment banks, hedge funds, mutual funds, and other institutional investors so prefer the small cap and most of them establish a portion to just invest into small cap companies and indices. Take notification of Stoll and Whaley (1983) about considering transaction costs of reconstructuring portfolios into account, the results of Size Effect are still strongly valid. The findings support Reinganum (1981, 1983, 1992) in his arguments about Size Effect, however, the thesis cannot make sure whether Size Effect is a time-period effect or it is upheld as a long-term basis. The debate of Brown, Kleidon, and Marsh (1982) and Reinganum (1981, 1983, 1992) about the stability of Size Effect is still a topic for later researches in Vietnamese stock markets.

The combination effect of Size and P/E is also proven to exist. Four accepted alphas of 0.18%, 0.15%, 0.14% and -0.13% belong to M1 (Smallest MC – Lowest P/E), M6 (Smallest MC – Low P/E), M13 (Mid Cap – Mod P/E), and M19 (Big MC – High P/E) respectively. Among them, two over three abnormal returns (M1 and M6) are found positively belong to smallest companies with relatively low P/E (Low and Lowest groups) one explanation of this phenomenon is the contribution of Size Effect which is found above. One last positive abnormal return belongs to Mod P/E group (with Mid cap), probably, P/E Effect found above plays some role in this result. And one negative abnormal return (M19) belong to the group of Big Cap and High P/E, this group also performed worst throughout the studying period with lowest mean returns (-0.21%) and lowest alpha (-0.13%). Take transaction cost into consideration, no significant change found that can alter the result. This findings support arguments of Reinganum (1981) and Basu (1983) that Size and P/E both contribute to anomaly returns however, this thesis cannot tell which factor play a heavier weight in influencing the abnormal returns.

A correlation analysis was conducted to test the relationship between Size and P/E themselves and found no significant influence of any factor to the other factor. A linear regression model was also tried to launch to find a relationship of Size and P/E but rejected due to not passing the test statistic.

The author believes that this thesis opened numerous other ways to dig further into the stock markets in Vietnam. A further study that tests whether all of the above findings are long-term basis or just time-period effect is absolutely needed. P/E and Size can also be combined to industrial factors to test the relationship of industry to P/E, the relationship of industry to Size, and the relationship of industry to the combination of Size and P/E are also believed to be extremely interesting and meaningful findings.

Probably one of the most significant contribution that this thesis, like hundreds of other academic works, made is that phenomena in financial markets can be explained and developed further with academic studies. It is even more meaningful at young markets like Vietnam’s. So it is, the world-stage is shifting and the sun is moving to the East. Capital flows are pouring into emerging markets of Eastern world in which Vietnam is one of the most attractive destinations of the new millennium. There are a lot of awaiting works.

--

Backward to[ Chapter IV – Analysis of Result and Discussion](https://huetri.com/2010/05/30/an-analysis-on-relations-of-price-earnings-ratio-and-market-capitalization-to-anomaly-returns-5/ "Chapter IV - Analysis of Result and Discussion")

 - ∞ -

**LIST OF REFERENCES**

1\. Anderson, K. & Brooks, C. (2005). “Decomposing the price-earnings ratio. Journal of Asset Management”. 6, 456-69. 2\. Anderson, K. & Brooks, C. (2006). “The long-term price-earnings ratio”. Journal of Business Finance & Accounting. 33, 1063-86. 3\. Barry, A. (2008). “Learning to love low P/E again”. Barron’s. 88, 17-18. 4\. Brown, P., Kleidon, A. W., & Marsh, T. A. (1983). “New evidence on the nature of size-related anomalies in stocks prices”. Journal of Financial Economics. 12, 33-56. 5\. Basu, S. (1983). “The relationship between earnings yield, market value, and return for NYSE common stocks: further evidence”. Journal of Financial Economics. 12, 129-156. 6\. Basu, S. (1977). “Investment Performance of common stocks in relation to their price-earnings ratio: a Test of the efficient market hypothesis”. The Journal of Finance. 32, 663-82. 7\. Chui, C. W. Andy & Wei, J. K. C. (1997). “Book-to-market, firm size, and the turn-of-the-year effect: Evidence from Pacific-basin emerging markets” (n.d.). 8\. Cook, T. J. & Rozeff, M. S. (1984). “Size and earning/price ratio anomalies: one effect or two?”. Journal of Financial and Quantitative. 19, 449-66. 9\. Defusco, R. A., McLeavey, D. W., Pinto, J. E., & Runkle, D. E. (2004). Hypothesis Testing (pp. 515-563). CFA Program Curriculum Volume 1 – Ethical and professional standards and quantitative methods. CFA Institute: Pearson Custom Publishing. 10\. Dudley, D., Jirasakuldech, B., & Zorn, T. (2008). “Return predictability and the P/E ratio: Reading the entrails”. Journal of Investing. 17, 75-82. 11\. Easton, P. D. (2004). “PE ratio, PEG ratios, and estimating the implied expected rate of return on equity capital”. The Accounting Review. 79, 73-95. 12\. Fama, E. F. & French, K. (1992). “The cross-section of expected stock returns”. The Journal of Finance. 47, 427-65. 13\. Fama, E. F. & French, K. (1993). “Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds”. Journal of Finance Economics. 33, 3-56. 14\. Fama, E. F. & French, K. (1996). “Multifactor explanation of asset pricing anomalies”. The Journal of Finance. 51, 55- 15\. Fairfield, P. M. (1994). “P/E, P/B and the present value of future dividends”. Financial Analysts Journal. 50, 23- 16\. Goodman, D. A. & Peavy, J. W. (1983). “Industry relative price-earnings ratios as indicators of investment returns”. Financial Analysts Journal (1983). 60-65. 17\. Hawawini, G. & Keim, D. B. (1994). “On predictability of common stock returns: Worldwide evidence”. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA. 18\. Johnson, R. Stafford, Fiore, Lyle C., & Zuber, R. (1989). “The investment performance of common stock in relations to their price-earnings ratios: an update of the Basu studying”. The Finance Review. 24, 499-505. 19\. Nicholson, S. F. (1960). “Price-earnings ratios”. Financial Analysts Journal. 16, 43-45. 20\. Peters, D. J. (1991). “Valuing a growth stock”. Journal of Portfolio Management. 17, 49-51. 21\. Reilly, F. K., Brown, K. C. (2006). An Introduction to Portfolio Management (pp. 239-265). CFA Program Curriculum Volume 4 – Corporate Finance and Portfolio Management. CFA Institute: Pearson Custom Publishing. 22\. Reilly, F. K., Brown, K. C. (2006). An Introduction to Asset Pricing Models (pp. 267-304). CFA Program Curriculum Volume 4 – Corporate Finance and Portfolio Management. CFA Institute: Pearson Custom Publishing. 23\. Reilly, F. K., Brown, K. C. (2006). Efficient Capital Markets (pp. 67-100). CFA Program Curriculum Volume 5 – Equity and Fixed Income. CFA Institute: Pearson Custom Publishing. 24\. Reilly, F. K., Brown, K. C. (2006). An Introduction to Security Valuation (pp. 125-170). CFA Program Curriculum Volume 5 – Equity and Fixed Income. CFA Institute: Pearson Custom Publishing. 25\. Robinson, T. R., Greuning, J. H. V., Henry, E., Broihahn, M. A. (2007). Financial Analysis Techniques (pp. 301-370). CFA Program Curriculum Volume 3 – Financial Reporting and Analysis. CFA Institute: Pearson Custom Publishing. 26\. Singal, V. (2004). Market Efficiency and Anomalies (pp. 105-121). CFA Program Curriculum Volume 5 – Equity and Fixed Income. CFA Institute: Pearson Custom Publishing. 27\. Staff (2004). “Buy high & sell low … P/Es that is!”. Shareowner. 18, 10-3. 28\. Stowe, J. D., Robinson, T. R., Pinto, J. E., McLeavey, D. W. (2003). Introduction to Price Multiples (pp. 197-227). CFA Program Volume 5 – Equity and Fixed Income. CFA Institute: Pearson Custom 29\. Tseng, K. C. (1988). “Low price, price-earnings ratio, market value, and abnormal stock returns”. The Financial Review. 23, 333- 30\. Weigand, R. A. & Irons, R. (2008). “Compression and expansion of the market P/E ratio: the Fed model explained”. Journal of Investing. 17, 55-64.