---
author: huetri@gmail.com
title: 'June 2011 - Awaiting signal: Trading volume'
slug: june-2011-awaiting-signal-trading-volume
id: 173
date: '2011-06-13 16:01:48'
layout: post
comments: false
categories:
  - 'Market: Vietnam'
tags:
  - Stock
  - Vietnam Investment
---

For Vietnam economy, I especially care about growth and inflation.  The government has a strong tendency for growth over the last and next decade.  Besides, Vietnam is a frontier market (Vietnam is not an emerging market yet, a frontier market is smaller and more isolated than an emerging market) - growth is the single most appealing factor from the stand point of foreign investors.  On the other hand, with growth tendency, inflation is an inevitable side effect and also the threat for making all of those growth efforts go to waste.  So, let's make it real quick: 1/ Growth, 2/ Inflation, 3/ balance of payment, 4/ Government's actions regarding to credit growth policies, and 5/ Investment under the climate.

**1/** For **growth**, quarterly growth in Vietnam had significantly lowed down in the first quarter: from 7.4% and 7.2% respectively in Q3 and Q4 2010 to 5.4% in Q1 2011.  Look further, Vietnam's economy composition is the mix of: Agriculture, services, and industrial and construction.  Among those, industrial and construction got the biggest hit in this slow down.  This can be seen as a very bad signal, because industrial and construction plays a critical role in export - the key economic direction of the government.  As import remains stand-still, a decrease in export means the trade deficit is widening.  This trade deficit puts the first downward pressure on VND.

**2/** This slow down is even more dangerous when it is accompanied by the highest **inflation** in the region.  From the CPI Index, we see that the inflation has the root from food sector.  Food sector's 26.5% inflation rate contributed noticeably to the over all CPI because food weights 40% of the Vietnam's CPI index.  This inflation puts the second downward pressure on VND.

**3/** Now, take a look on the **balance of payment**.  Brief, Vietnam has a trade deficit, a dried reserve, and a low committed foreign influx.  The country used to run a trade deficit for a decade with a strong backed from positive foreign investments (FDI and FII) to finance the trade deficit.  However, since 2008 foreign investments have dropped sharply followed the Vietnam's stock markets crash.  Besides, Vietnam's peg exchange rate policy and a weak economy created a golden spot for global currency speculators.  To hedge the risk of being attacked by global hedge funds, government restricts the outflow of foreign currency by administrative barriers.  This policy made Vietnam become extremely less attractive from short-term foreign investors standpoint - because they can move in anytime, but they can't move out anytime.  Plus, Vinashin affair hurts a lot on foreign investors' trust toward the government.  Without a strong backed from FDI and FII, Vietnam government has to use foreign reserve to finance the trade deficit.  With around US$13 billion, Vietnam can only run trade deficit in 6-8 weeks.  Worst case - when the foreign reserve hits zero, the country has to sharply depreciate VND to curb the trade deficit as Thailand did in 1997\. This is the third downward pressure on VND.

**4/** Because, more than anything else, high inflation might cause social unrest, and inflation perhaps the most dangerous economic phenomena that affects politics.  A slow down in **credit growth** is already in agenda.  This means less money will be pumped into the economy and, hence, decreases the effect of declining value of money.  If the government followed this policy strictly, it would sacrifice growth to stabilize the inflation and weak currency.  However past observations indicates that the government has a strong tendency to favor growth, the risk is: the government might very likely to abandon the policies when it yet reach the final line, and turn to growth policies again.

**5/** From the analysis, **the risk of domestic currency depreciation remains real**, especially with the seasonal effect during year-end months.  Currently, regarding to the very effective administrative policies to control the free USD/VND market, another sharp VND depreciation probability is now much lower than before.  I believe the USD/VND will still remain stable at least till November.  We should take a close look on the USD/VND in the free market, because now, most people who owned USD would sell USD for VND and open saving account in VND for 14% (or 17% negotiated) interest rate.  However, I still see a risk of a sudden move in trading volume of free USD/VND market, historically accompanied by USD price increases.  A sudden demand increase in free USD market always, always tells something.  So, I'll surely keep an eye closely on volume of the free currency market, a sudden demand could be a "convert trigger".

On **stock market**, low growth, high inflation, and credit growth restriction almost drain fuel away the market.  The behaviors of the market recently also tell the same story: VNIndex doesn't reflect the real overall market situation (would be much lower without the largest cap stocks) anymore and HNX is below book value.  With the slow-moving and side-way market.  The stocks might be subjected to divergences regarding to industries and company fundamentals.  Finding alphas through thinly trade and neglected trading companies are very risky under low trading volume market like these months.  I will still favor high liquidity stocks (for liquidity risk hedging) and good inflation pass-through rate companies under this climate.  Retail is a good inflation pass-through industry because consumers bear the inflation risk when buying products.  Industrial manufacturing and construction get the biggest hit in inflation time: they absorbs the large part of inflation due to its inability to increase contracted prices as well as their menu cost.  A sudden decrease in trading volume means the money are attracting out of the market (in this case I strongly think about USD market).  On the other hand, steady trading volume increases would be my most wanted bullish signal.

So it's all about trading volume.  Both free currency and stock market.